= Encyclopedia of Life - Vagrant Environment

=== www.eol.org

== INTRODUCTION

Welcome to the Encyclopedia of Life project.  This project contains the minimal stuff needed to get
the Vagrant version of the code working.  This repo should be checked out on the host operating
system for the VirtualBox VM that will contain the EOL code.

== LICENSE

The full code base is released under the MIT License.  Details are available in the "LICENSE" file at
the root of the code folder.

== GETTING STARTED

Using Vagrant is the fastest way we know of getting a working version of the EOL code base
going.  It uses a pre-configured Vagrant box to shortcut much of the configuration work needed
to get the EOL code base working locally.

=== INSTALLATION

To get things up and running, these are the steps you need to take.  If you 
actually run through this process, please update this list with any changes 
you find necessary!

Note that some of these steps require administrator access on your machine.

Also most of this process will be run from a command line.  On Macs you can use
the Terminal application which should be in your Applications => Utilities folder.
On Windows machines you can use puTTY (http://www.putty.org/).  On Linux machines
it depends a bit on the distro you are using, but we expect you'll know how to get
to a command line.  Below commands are in boxes and indicated by an initial '%'
shell prompt which should *not* be typed in.  You will be switching between the
local host command line and the Vagrant machine command line a bit.  Any section
that needs to be on the Vagrant machine will start with:

  # Vagrant

Sections that start on the local host will start with:

  # Local Host

If you are working through this in order, it will not be necessary
to exit and restart enter vagrant each time, but there is at least one spot where
that is necessary.  To get from the vagrant host to the local host give the command:

  % exit

=== FIRST THINGS FIRST

Things you need to do:

1. Setup VirtualBox
2. Install Vagrant
3. Install Git
4. Git the Vagrantfile
5. Run 'vagrant up'

==== Setup VirtualBox

Go to https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads and download the appropriate version of VirtualBox.
Follow the installation instructions, but don't worry about actually running the application.

==== Install Vagrant

Go to http://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html and download the appropriate version of Vagrant.
Follow the installation instructions.

==== Install Git

Get a reasonably recent version of the command line version of Git.  This may already be installed
on your machine or you may need to go somewhere like http://github.com and follow their instructions
to get it installed.  Note that you will want probably want an account on GitHub if you don't already
have one.  You will probably want to configure git with these commands:

  # Local Host
  % git config --global user.name "Your Full Name"
  % git config --global user.email "Your Email Address”

==== Git the Vagrantfile

  # Local Host
  % git clone https://github.com/EOL/eol-vagrant.git

is the easiest approach. However, if you also may want to setup SSH access to GitHub as described here:
help.github.com/articles/generating-ssh-keys

==== Run 'vagrant up'

  # Local Host
  % cd eol-vagrant
  % vagrant up

This should create a Vagrant VM on your local host.  Once it completes you should be able to access it with:

  % vagrant ssh

You may want to go into the VirtualBox application at this point and just verify that the VM has 2G of memory.

=== Configuring Your New Vagrant Box

Currently the eol-vagrant Vagrantfile uses a very generic box.  We plan to make an EOL specific box available
that will shortcut many of the following steps.  However, this list will still be useful for rebuilding the
box.  The steps you need to do are:

1. Update the box
2. Install git on the box
3. Get rvm
4. Get the EOL code base
5. Install the required version of Ruby
6. Add some more important packages
7. Install MySQL
8. Get your EOL gems
9. Setup virtuoso
10. Install redis
11. Get EOL Private Config
12. Setup EOL

==== Update the box

This will bring the operating system on the generic box up to date in terms of security patches etc.

  # Local Host
  % vagrant ssh
  % sudo apt-get update

==== Install git on the box

Now you have to install and reconfigure git on the VM:

  # Vagrant
  % sudo apt-get install git
  % git config --global user.name "Your Full Name"
  % git config --global user.email "Your Email Address"

==== Get rvm

  # Vagrant
  % sudo apt-get install curl
  % curl -L https://get.rvm.io | bash -s stable
  % exit

Note that you should exit any shells you have on the VM so that they can correctly pickup the rvm shell functions.

==== Get the EOL code base

  # Local Host
  % vagrant ssh
  % ROOT=~/git
  % mkdir -p $ROOT
  % cd $ROOT
  % git clone https://github.com/EOL/eol.git

==== Install the required version of Ruby

  # Vagrant
  % RUBY_VERSION=`cat $ROOT/eol/.ruby-version`
  % rvm install $RUBY_VERSION

==== Add some more important packages

  # Vagrant
  % sudo apt-get install build-essential default-jre memcached flex gperf \
    libqt4-dev libxslt-dev libxml2-dev

==== Install MySQL

  # Vagrant
  % sudo apt-get install mysql-server mysql-client libmysqlclient-dev

The above will ask you set the password for the database. Remember this password
for the next step.

  # Vagrant
  % mysql_secure_installation
  % cp $ROOT/eol/config/database.sample.yml $ROOT/eol/config/database.yml

The standard Unix textfile editor 'vi' should be available.  If you prefer the emacs editor you can install it
with:

  % sudo apt-get install emacs23

The rest of this document assumes that $EDITOR is set to the editor of your choice.

Now edit your database.yml file to add the mysql password:

  % $EDITOR $ROOT/eol/config/database.yml

==== Get your EOL gems

  # Vagrant
  % cd $ROOT/eol
  % bundle install

==== Setup virtuoso

  # Vagrant
  % git clone https://github.com/openlink/virtuoso-opensource.git /tmp/virtuoso-opensource
  % cd /tmp/virtuoso-opensource
  % CFLAGS="-O2 -m64"
  % export CFLAGS
  % ./autogen.sh --enable-maintainer-mode --prefix=/usr/local/ --with-readline --program-transform-name="s/isql/isql-vt/"
  % ./configure --prefix=/usr/local/ --with-readline --program-transform-name="s/isql/isql-vt/"
  % make
  % sudo make install
  % cd /usr/local/var/lib/virtuoso/db
  % sudo virtuoso-t -d &
  % sleep 15
  % sudo killall virtuoso-t
  % git clone https://github.com/mbl-cli/virtuoso-cookbook.git /tmp/virtuoso-cookbook
  % cd /tmp/virtuoso-cookbook
  % sudo cp templates/default/init.erb /etc/init.d/virtuoso
  % sudo chmod 0755 /etc/init.d/virtuoso 
  % sudo service virtuoso start
  % curl -i -d "INSERT {<http://demo.openlinksw.com/DAV/home/demo_about.rdf>
    <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#type>
    <http://rdfs.org/sioc/ns#User>}" \
    -u "dba:dba" -H "Content-Type: application/sparql-query" \
    http://localhost:8890/DAV/home/dba/upload

The response should be:

  HTTP/1.1 201 Created
  Server: Virtuoso/05.00.3023 (Win32) i686-generic-win-32  VDB
  Connection: Keep-Alive
  Content-Type: text/html; charset=ISO-8859-1
  Date: Fri, 28 Dec 2007 12:50:12 GMT
  Accept-Ranges: bytes
  MS-Author-Via: SPARQL
  Content-Length: 0

Next, in a browser on your local host, go to http://localhost:8890/ => Conductor => LinkedData (login with dba/dba) => Graphs (blue tab) => Graphs (white tab) and check to see if there is a graph named http://localhost:8890%2FDAV%2Fdba%2Fupload
...if so, delete it.

  # Vagrant
  % isql-vt 1111 dba dba

This will start an interactive command-line session with Virtuoso.  In this environment give the following commands:

  GRANT EXECUTE ON SPARUL_CLEAR TO "SPARQL";
  GRANT EXECUTE ON DB.DBA.SPARUL_DROP TO "SPARQL";
  GRANT DELETE ON DB.DBA.RDF_QUAD TO "SPARQL";
  GRANT EXECUTE ON DB.DBA.SPARQL_INSERT_DICT_CONTENT TO "SPARQL";
  GRANT EXECUTE ON DB.DBA.SPARQL_DELETE_DICT_CONTENT TO "SPARQL";
  quit;

==== Install redis

  # Vagrant
  % sudo apt-get install redis-server

==== Get EOL Private Config

Currently this requires you have access to the private mbl-cli GitHub
community. We plan to at least make this step unnecessary to get the tests
passing.

For now, you must then create an SSH key and register it on GitHub as
described here: https://help.github.com/articles/generating-ssh-keys

The short story is run:

  # Vagrant
  % ssh-keygen -t rsa -C "Your Email Address"

And then copy the resulting ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub into your SSH keys on GitHub.
Note that the ssh-add command mentinoed in the GitHub docs is not necessary.

Once the ssh key is setup run:

  # Vagrant
  % cd $ROOT/eol
  % rake eol:site_specific repo=git@github.com:mbl-cli/eol-private.git

==== Setup EOL

  # Vagrant
  % cd $ROOT/eol
  % rake eol:site_specific repo=git@github.com:mbl-cli/eol-private.git
  % rake db:create:all
  % rake solr:start
  % rake eol:db:recreate
  % rake scenarios:load NAME=bootstrap
  % rake eol:db:recreate RAILS_ENV=test
  % rake scenarios:load NAME=bootstrap RAILS_ENV=test
  % rake
